This directory contains 5 subdirectories, each illustrating a different use
case of the lsfitpar program. Each subdirectory has its own README , containing
the sequence of commands required to run the complete example. The user is
invited to read the comments accompanying these commands and inspect the files
involved; they are all human-readable ASCII text files. Most of the examples
rely on scripts that are located in the ../scripts directory; it is hoped that
these tools will be useful when running production calculations. Additionally,
the examples contain invocations of CHARMM and gnuplot , assuming both are
installed in $PATH . If not, the reader can easily modify the command lines as
to read these programs from the correct locations. Since not all our users have
access to CHARMM, pre-calculated CHARMM outputs are provided so that the reader
can simulate the CHARMM run by instead running the commented-out commands
starting with "cp" or "gunzip". Ports of the CHARMM scripts to other MM
programs are welcome for inclusion in future releases; please contact Kenno
Vanommeslaeghe if you have made a faithful port.

Side note: the README files in the subdirectories are formatted as
Bourne-/POSIX-compatible shell scripts. Therefore, provided that all the
necessary 3rd party programs (CHARMM, gnuplot,...) are in $PATH , it is
possible to "cd" into the subdirectories and execute them as following:
. ./README  # in a Bourne-/POSIX-compatible shell such as bash, zsh, ksh,..
sh README   # in an incompatible shell such as csh, tcsh,...
While doing so largely defeats the purpose of these learning examples, it may
be useful as a limited automated testcase.

illcond
=======
This example reproduces the case study "A typical ill-conditioned pair of
dihedrals" in the paper: [1] K. Vanommeslaeghe, M. Yang, A. D. MacKerell Jr.,
J. Comput. Chem. 2015, DOI:10.1002/jcc.23897 . An awk script generates the
virtual target data and measurements, then lsfitpar is invoked 27 times by the
custom shell script multifit.sh , which also extracts the amplitudes K from the
resulting parameter files. Finally, the plot in the paper is reproduced using
gnuplot .

2+1
===
This example reproduces the case study "2+1 dihedrals around the same rotatable
bond" in the paper [1]. Again, an awk script generates the idealized target
data and measurements. This time, 2 lsfitpar runs are started from the
command-line with different bias formulae, showing the difference in output
parameters as discussed in the paper. This is also the only example
illustrating the --equivalent-to feature. Specifically, in a technically
realistic use case, two of the measurements would have the same atom types in
the first line of their measurement files, but for the sake of illustration,
these two measurement have different atom types here, and the lsfitpar program
is instructed a posteriori to regard them as equivalent with the
--equivalent-to flag. To obtain the aforementioned realistic use case, it would
suffice to change the first line of 3x3.meas3 to "a2 b2 c2 d2" and remove the
last line from the .lsarg files.  Doing so results in exactly the same fit in a
purely mathematical sense, though the output and its meaning is subtly
different. An excellent real-life illustration of "2+1 dihedrals around the
same rotatable bond" is provided in the "sulfaz" example below. Finally, it
should be noted that we deliberately used an unrealistically high bias fraction
(10%) to demonstrate the power of the bias compensation. This is again for the
sake of illustration; in real use cases, such a high bias fraction may lead to
a too coarse reproduction of the target energy profile. See the paper [1] for
more info.

sulfaz
======
Here, the 5-sulfamoyl-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-yl ("SULFAZ") example in the CGenFF
tutorial is revisited. This tutorial was first presented at CECAM's June 2012
"Advances in Biomolecular Modelling and Simulations using CHARMM" workshop:
http://www.cecam.org/workshop-5-805.html ; its files can also be downloaded
from the CGenFF download page:
http://mackerell.umaryland.edu/~kenno/cgenff/download.shtml#tutor . In pages
98-102 of the tutorial slide show (available at the same locations), the manual
fitting of the dihedral of interest in sulfaz is demonstrated. In the present
example, we automate this fit using lsfitpar . The procedure in the README
starts from a QM scan and ends with producing a parameter file and predicted
energy profile. Of note is how close lsfitpar's parameters are to the manually
fitted ones. This is not a trivial result; MCSA fitting requires significant
post-processing to obtain similarly transferably-looking parameters, and even
lsfitpar itself yields non-optimal results when using the target-adapted bias
(data not shown but straightforward to generate), as discussed in the section
"2+1 dihedrals around the same rotatable bond" in the paper and the example
"2+1" above. Likewise, to obtain this favorable balance between the different
parameters around the same rotatable bond, it was necessary to increase the
bias fraction to 2% (the default is 0.1%, and in real-life cases, the most
optimal results are usually obtained somewhere in the 0.1%-3% range). The
lsfitpar-predicted "mme" profile is all but identical to the one on slide 102
of the tutorial, especially considering that the former is RMS aligned while
the latter is aligned to zero. A slightly closer fit to the QM data can be
obtained with a lower bias fraction, but this minuscule gain is not worth the
sacrifice in transferability of the parameters, and would indeed amount to
(mild) overfitting. Also note that the "mm0" profile in gnuplot differs
substantially from the initial guess on slide 98. This highlights the
importance of differentiating between an "initial guess" (MM(init)) and a
"zeroed" (MM0) profile. The former (featured in the slide show) is what one
would get by directly applying the force field generated by cgenff.paramchem.org
without optimization and is therefore a relevant baseline against which to
measure the improvement obtained with lsfitpar, while the latter (mm0 in
gnuplot) is an artificial profile with the parameters of interest set to zero
so that lsfitpar can fill them in correctly, and has no scientific relevance.
Finally, this example illustrates the first principle of parameter fitting:
/--------------------------------------------------------\
| ANY ROTATABLE BOND IN THE MOLECULE NEEDS TO BE SCANNED |
| IN THE QM AND CONSTRAINED IN THE MM ONLY ONCE, EVEN IF |
| MULTIPLE DIHEDRAL PARAMETERS OF INTEREST APPLY TO IT!  |
\--------------------------------------------------------/

thf
===
This example reproduces the case study "Tetrahydrofuran" in the paper [1].
After decompressing the QM target data, it follows roughly the same workflow as
sulfaz, except that there are now multiple scans, some of which involve angles
and bonds. Accordingly, there is an extra step were the individual QM energy
files are concatenated, and a substantially more complicated variant of the
CHARMM script "allscan.inp" is used. Since some of the scans - especially the
constrained angle scan - visit points that are undesirably high in energy from
a thermal point of view, a cutoff of 12 kcal/mol is applied to the target data
using the script fit_cut . As explained in the paper [1], a weight file is
specified in thf_all.lsarg . Multiplicities are specified for the three
dihedral parameters, but the bond and angle parameters are not mentioned; this
means they will receive default treatment. Note that in a future version (at
the time of writing, we're targeting version 0.9.2), no default treatment for
the angles will be provided, and the .lsarg file will need to specify
explicitly whether their reference values are allowed to deviate from the
corresponding values supplied as an initial guess. The "Adapted" fit in table 2
in the paper [1] is exactly reproduced; reproducing the two other fits in the
table is left as an exercise for the reader. This example illustrates two more
principles of parameter fitting:
/------------------------------------------------------------\
| FOR EACH PARAMETER TO BE FIT, *ALL* ITS OCCURRENCES IN THE |
| MOLECULE NEED TO BE MEASURED, EVEN IF THE DF CORRESPONDING |
| TO THOSE OCCURRENCES ARE NOT BEING SCANNED THEMSELVES.     |
\------------------------------------------------------------/
/----------------------------------------------------------------------------\
| *ALL* DF THAT ARE MEASURED ALSO NEED TO BE CONSTRAINED, *EXCEPT* WHEN THIS |
| LEADS TO OVERCONSTRAINING. FOR EXAMPLE, PER THE FIRST PRINCIPLE, A         |
| ROTATABLE BOND SHOULD NEVER BE CONSTRAINED MORE THAN ONCE, WITH THE        |
| POSSIBLE EXCEPTIONS OF BONDS TO NITROGENS AND (PARTIAL) DOUBLE BONDS. MORE |
| GENERALLY, IN CASE OF OVERCONSTRAINING, THE SET OF CONSTRAINTS NEEDS TO BE |
| REEVALUATED CAREFULLY TO MINIMIZE THE RESULTING ISSUES WHILE RETAINING     |
| RELEVANT MEASUREMENTS. THIS CAN GET NONTRIVIAL, ESPECIALLY FOR RINGS.      |
\----------------------------------------------------------------------------/

nesm
====
Here, the case study "N-ethylsulfamate." in the paper [1] is reproduced. In the
interest of time, pre-processed QM and MM scan results and measurements are
provided, and only the actual parameter fitting is performed. This example was
mainly included to demonstrate the use of the --groups flag and its role in the
standard parametrization procedure proposed in the paper, i.e. using a group of
relaxed QM scans for the dihedrals and a second group of constrained QM scans
for the bonds and angles, with a large energy offset between the two.

Reference
=========
[1] K. Vanommeslaeghe, M. Yang, A. D. MacKerell Jr., J. Comput. Chem. 2015,
DOI:10.1002/jcc.23897
